**************************
* UNIX ARCHIVES OF TYPO3 *
**************************

INTRODUCTION
============

As you have downloaded this package you seem to know already about TYPO3.
If you don't, visit http://typo3.org/ where you can find many useful
information.

This short guide lists the important steps to install this package.

By default TYPO3 installs into the folder:
   http://[your.site.name]/<this_site_name>/

Read the additional instructions to install TYPO3 in the root folder:
   http://[your.site.name]/


IMPORTANT NOTE
==============

Please be aware of the fact that the file transfer protocol (FTP) does not
support Symlinks. You cannot unpack these archives locally and copy them
to your server using FTP, even if the target server actually is a Unix
server.

So if you don't have shell access, try to use a terminal emulator instead.
(PHPshell to give you an example - Google knows all of them!)

If this doesn't work you'll have to stick back to the ZIP version :-(


NEWBIE INFORMATION ABOUT THE TYPO3 FILESYSTEM STRUCTURE
=======================================================

A Unix TYPO3 installation consists of two parts:
     1) The "source" package
     2) The "dummy" package

The dummy package contains the skeleton directory structure for a TYPO3
installation and a symlink ('typo3_src') to the location of the source
package which contains all the PHP files, images, JavaScript files, etc.
that TYPO3 needs to run.

In other words: You can have several TYPO3 installations with just one
source package. A typical directory structure looks like this:

/var/www/typo3_src-3.8.1/   # the untared 3.8.0 source package
/var/www/typo3_src-4.1/     # the untared 4.1 source package
/var/www/installation1/     # the untared dummy package of a TYPO3
                            # installation running on TYPO3 3.8.1
    /typo3_src  --> ../typo3_src-3.8.1/   # a symlink to the 3.8.1 source
    /typo3conf/
    /typo3temp/
    /fileadmin/
    /.../
/var/www/installation2/     # the untared dummy package of a TYPO3
                            # installation running on TYPO3 4.1
    /typo3_src  --> ../typo3_src-4.1/     # a symlink to the 4.1 source
    /typo3conf/
    /typo3temp/
    /fileadmin/
    /.../

As you see, the two TYPO3-installations (possibly with different domains)
can use the same TYPO3 source package. You can even change the source
package simply be changing the symlink inside the installation directory.


STEP BY STEP
============

1 Get the TYPO3 source package and the TYPO3 dummy package.

2 Copy the archives to the web root of your server.
  (Debian default is /var/www/, SuSE default is /srv/www/)

3 Unpack the archives:
  $ tar xzf typo3_src-<version>.tar.gz
  $ tar xfz dummy-<version>.tar.gz

4 Rename the dummy-<version> directory to fit your needs and make sure it
  is accessible by your webserver (for example by creating a virtual
  host). We assume you rename the directory to cms:
  $ mv dummy-<version> cms

5 Set permissions (as root): There are at least two options.
  These steps will make four directories writable for the webserver:
  - cms/fileadmin/
  - cms/typo3conf/
  - cms/typo3temp/
  - cms/uploads/

	5.a (recommended)
	    Run these commands as root in the cms/ directory:
	    # chgrp -R <wwwserver> fileadmin typo3conf typo3temp uploads
	    # chmod -R g+w,o-rwx fileadmin typo3conf typo3temp uploads

	    ... where <wwwserver> is the name of the group your webserver
	    is running as

	5.b (insecure but easy to apply)
	    I repeat: This is insecure!
	    Do not use this method if you are working on a shared server!

	    Simply run this command:
	    $ chmod -R a+w fileadmin typo3conf typo3temp uploads

6 Check the symlink cms/typo3_src and make sure it points to the source
  directory.
  (See above: "Newbie information about the TYPO3 filesystem structure")

7 In your browser, visit
  http://[your.site.name]/cms/

8 Follow the instructions in the 1-2-3 install tool

9 From this point, you can access the backend through
  http://[your.site.name]/cms/typo3/
  with the username "admin" and password "password".

That's it :-)


INSTALLING TYPO3 IN THE WEBROOT FOLDER
======================================

1 Follow the steps 1-6 above.

2 Move the files in the cms/ folder up one level.

  $ cd cms
  $ mv * ../
  $ cd ../

3 Update the symlink

  $ rm typo3_src
  $ ln -s ./typo3_src-<version> typo3_src

4 Now TYPO3 runs in http://[your.site.name]/

That's it :-)


WHAT SHOULD YOU DO IF YOU HAVE A PROBLEM?
=========================================

TYPO3 is a powerful and complex professional application. When you start
out there will be many things you don´t understand, or that don't seem to
make sense. There is a widely used mailing list (more information on
typo3.com & typo3.org) where many experienced users and developers
lurk... they are always willing to help, provided you followed these steps
BEFORE you ask your question:

1 - Read all available documentation carefully

2 - Read the webserver error logfiles
    (for example /var/log/apache/error.log)

3 - Read all available documentation again

4 - Search the mailing list archive carefully

5 - If you still can't figure it out - ask the list...:
      - Newsgroup:     news://news.netfielders.de/
      - Mailing lists: http://lists.netfielders.de/

    When posting to one of the lists, see the following guidelines...
      - Be polite
	 Always include the version of used TYPO3 and server environment
	 (phpinfo())... note that this is available within the TYPO3
	 Install Tool
      - Be as specific and clear as possible - questions like "my TYPO3
	 installation does not work - what can I do???" will be ignored.
	 Although English may not be your first language, if those reading
	 your posting can't understand it, you won't get the help you need
      - If you are really having a tough time getting something working,
	 stay cool and don't criticise or flame. Problems are normally
	 caused by lack of research into the documentation, or
	 misunderstanding, not because of bugs. Be logical about your
	 troubleshooting, and you'll get there

6 - If you have identified a genuine new bug, report it at
    http://bugs.typo3.org/ ...do not post to the list about it

Please be aware that if you ask questions that are answered in the
available documentation, you may not get a reply, or any help from the
developers or any experienced users!

We are aware that there is still some work to be done on the
documentation, and the platform for user support... please forgive us for
not having all these gaps filled. If you feel that some information is
missing, hard to find or just plain wrong, or you have a suggestion on
improving TYPO3 or the "support services", please let us know so that we
can do what is necessary. You could also volunteer to help with the work!

(c) Nigel Jackson, Ingmar Schlecht
    Unix related additions made by Michael Stucki and some Wiki users:
    http://wiki.typo3.org/index.php/Tgz-INSTALL.txt

-- Michael Stucki <michael@typo3.org>  Tue, 06 Mar 2007  01:22:12 +0100
